All right.
The next thing you want to talk about is actually charging objects because we know if we could put charge
on objects then they're going to be forces acting between them.
So what if I wanted to charge my coffee mug.
What if I wanted to charge this aluminum can.
All right.
There is something called the Tribal electric series.
Okay.
And I've got a list of elements over here of different materials on this tribal electric series.
We'll come back to this in a minute.
The first thing I really want you to understand that when you have any object and you want to charge
it the only thing that you're moving are the electrons.
Okay.
Take this aluminum can for example if I wanted to charge it I can either add electrons to it or I can
remove some of the electrons that are kind of free that are not tightly bound to the nucleus.
The protons and neutrons Do not move for that to happen I would have to break off a piece.
Okay it's really only the electrons that either get added or they get taken away from objects and that's
how you can charge them.
All right.
If I would add electrons to this can somehow.
Then it would become negatively charged if I would remove some of the electrons that are on the outside
of the aluminum nucleus.
What I would do then is I would make it positively charged because I've removed some electrons.
OK.
Now the tribal electric series tells us which materials tend to lose electrons easily and which materials
tend to gain electrons easily so let's have a little look at some of these.
So let's have a look at the rabbit fur the rabbit fur is near the top.
OK.
And near the top.
And I've kind of listed it over here which means it loses electrons really easily.
OK.
This guy loses electrons very very easily.
And what I have here is a piece of rabbit pelt rabbit fur and it's been dyed blue.
But that's OK.
It's still rabbit pelts so this is a material that tends to lose its electrons very easily and it will
lose them when you rub it against something.
So what we want to do now.
Imagine if I wanted to negatively charge an object.
OK.
So here's my object.
I'm gonna have a pipe and here's my rabbit pelt.
OK.
What I want to do this guy here will lose electrons.
So I want to end up having a whole bunch of electrons added electrons on this rod over here.
Okay I imagine here we have a rod or a pipe.
Let me show you the pipe that I'm going to use.
Ideally what you want to do is you want to have a pipe that gains electrons or accepts electrons very
very easily.
OK.
And what I have here is a PDC pipe.
This is used in kind of plumbing right.
And this object actually if I go down this tribal electric series over here the further I go down the
more it's easily for that object to gain electrons.
OK.
That's what we have here.
Game electrons actually PDC pipe is not here but it actually falls right over here.
This is PDC pipe poly vinyl chloride.
OK.
That's this material over here.
And it gains electrons very easily.
So imagine now if I take my rabbit Pelt and I rub it right.
Rabbit pelt loses electrons.
And you rub it against the PDC pipe that's it.
Give it a few strokes like this.
And now what I have here is a piece of pipe that is negatively charged.
You can actually hear it when you rub it.
You can hear the electrons actually jumping across or going onto the pipe this is negatively charged.
All right.
How do I prove that to you that it's negatively charged.
Well let's do a little experiment.
So for this first experiment here I have the aluminum can which is basically neutral right now.
There's maybe a little bit of excess charge on it but not much.
And what I'm going to do now is I'm going to charge my pipe or the PDC pipes so all I do is I just take
the rabbit pelt and just rub it up against it.
All right I have quite a bit of charge on it.
Now watch what happens when I bring it close to this neutral can over here.
Oh see you can control the motion of the can and I'm not touching it here.
I'm not touching it.
Be very very careful and you can see the closer I have it the faster the force but I can make this can
move or accelerate pretty fast just by bringing it close to it.
All right kind of a cool little experiment you could do.
So PDC pipe is negatively charged.
The question is now why does that can end up being attracted to the PDC pipe.
If this is neutral so what happens over here.
Let's have a look at that all right so let's have a look at my PVR pipes or after rubbing it with the
pelt.
The PDC since it appears at the bottom of this tribal electric series we said that it gains electrons
very easily.
OK.
So that becomes negatively charged.
OK so we're gonna have access negative charge over here on this PDC pipe and then I bring it close to
an aluminum can which is really neutral.
Right.
It has the same number of positives and negatives.
It has all these aluminum atoms just right next to each other.
However it is kind of a conducting material.
Right.
And the electrons actually are able to move.
So imagine now you bring this negatively charged object if you bring it closer.
OK if I bring it closer.
Well what happens.
Right.
Imagine initially we had kind of electrons.
And again it's only the electrons that moves I'm only going to draw the electrons but clearly there
is also positive charges for each one of those.
Let's just draw both of them.
All right.
Just imagine this can here made up of only a few atoms.
So what happens.
Well as you bring this closer we know now that these negative charges on the PDC pipe are going to repel
the negative charges of the aluminum can.
Right.
And what's going to happen is these guys here are basically going to move.
Now some of them are kind of closer to the atoms to the positive protons of the aluminum.
So they're going to stay there.
But there are some electrons that want to move away from it.
Right.
Because they get repelled by these negative charges.
So when they move away from it what happens then.
Well we've got to get rid of some of these excess electrons on this side.
And what we're left with then is this picture of excess positive charges on this side fewer Oh I lost
my can.
Let's try.
Let's try this.
And we have a net positive charge over here.
I'm going to add extra electrons because some of the electrons that were closer on this side end up
moving on this side.
Right.
So what happens over here for this can.
So this side of the CAN side that's far away is becomes more negative and the side over here that's
closest to the PDC rod.
This guy here becomes more positive
always that mean in terms of the forces now.
I think about all the forces involved.
Each one of these charges interacts with every charge over here but as a whole you get kind of all of
these negative charges which are going to interact with these ones that's a attractive force on the
can f this way.
And there's also a repulsive force from this PDC pipe to the excess negative charges over here however
that force might draw like this.
This is the other force right from the repulsive force between the charges.
However this vector is smaller than this one.
Right.
And the reason that it's smaller is simply due to the distance.
All right.
This distance over here is small.
OK.
Small distance we saw from cool Ohm's Law.
Small distance equals a bigger force.
So the net force on the can then has to be in this direction.
There is no way for me to take this pipe into actually repel the can.
It's always going to be attractive when I bring the pipe on the other side.
Again the electrons just want to get away from it.
So they kind of move to the other side of the car.
And the ones that can.
Some of these electrons are free electrons are not bound not tightly bound to the positives of the aluminum.
The aluminum atoms.
All right.
So that's kind of the simple explanation as to why this can is always attracted to this PDC pipe and
you can control its motion just by moving the BBC pipe from one side to the other.